Docs 8740 dwstreaming duke (#1616)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-streaming.adoc

= Streaming in DataWeave

DataWeave supports end-to-end streaming through a flow in a Mule application. Streaming speeds the processing of large documents without overloading memory.

> DataWeave processes streamed data as its bytes arrive instead of scanning the entire document to index it. DataWeave can also pass streamed output data directly to a message processor without saving it to the disk. This behavior enables DataWeave and Mule to process data faster and consume fewer resources than the default processes for reading and writing data.

Reviewer: I would say `DataWeave can also pass streamed output data directly to a message processor without saving it to the disk by enabling deferred mode`

Author: When in deferred mode, DataWeave can also pass streamed output data directly to a message processor without saving it to the disk.

Reviewer: 👍

----
%dw 2.0
output application/xml
---
{
  salesorder: {
    itemList: payload.order."order-items".*"order-item" map {
      ("i_" ++ $$) : {
        id: $.@id,
        productId: $.product,
        quantity: $.quantity,
        price: $.price
      }
    }
  }
}
----

The script produces the following XML output.

[source,XML,linenums]
----
<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<salesorder>
  <itemList>
    <i_0>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>2</quantity>
      <productId>111</productId>
      <price>8.90</price>
    </i_0>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_1>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>7</quantity>
      <productId>222</productId>
      <price>5.20</price>
    </i_1>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_2>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>2</quantity>
      <productId>111</productId>
      <price>8.90</price>
    </i_2>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_3>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>7</quantity>
      <productId>222</productId>
      <price>5.20</price>
    </i_3>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_4>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>7</quantity>
      <productId>222</productId>
      <price>5.20</price>
    </i_4>
  </itemList>
</salesorder>
----
​

> == Validate that a Script is Streamable

Reviewer: I would add in the title that is *experimental*

Author: done

​
To help you code in a streamable way and avoid mistakes that can break the streaming process, DataWeave provides an _advanced, experimental_ annotation and a related directive:

* `@StreamCapable()` annotation: Use this annotation to validate whether the script can sequentially access a variable (typically the `payload` variable).

> * `input` directive: The `@streamCapable()` annotation requires the use of an input directive in the DataWeave script that identifies the MIME type of the data source, for example, `input payload application/xml`.

Reviewer: **@streamCapable()** is with capital **S**

Author: done

= Streaming in DataWeave

> DataWeave supports end-to-end streaming through a flow in a Mule application. Streaming speeds the processing of large documents without overloading memory.

Reviewer 2: Excellent, precise intro!

> DataWeave processes streamed data as its bytes arrive instead of scanning the entire document to index it. When in deferred mode, DataWeave can also pass streamed output data directly to a message processor without saving it to the disk. This behavior enables DataWeave and Mule to process data faster and consume fewer resources than the default processes for reading and writing data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DataWeave processes stream data as its bytes arrive instead of scanning the entire document to index it. When in deferred mode, DataWeave can also pass streamed output data directly to a message processor without saving it to the disk. This behavior enables DataWeave and Mule to process data faster and consume fewer resources than the default processes for reading and writing data.
```

To stream successfully, it is important to understand the following:

> * The basic unit of the stream is specific to the data format. The unit is a record in a CSV document, an element of an array in a JSON document, or a collection in an XML document.

Reviewer 2: Per our bullet-list item format:
```suggestion
* The basic unit of the stream is specific to the data format. +
The unit is a record in a CSV document, an element of an array in a JSON document, or a collection in an XML document.
```

> * Streaming accesses each unit of the stream sequentially. Streaming does not support random access to a document.

Reviewer 2: ditto
```suggestion
* Streaming accesses each unit of the stream sequentially. +
Streaming does not support random access to a document.
```

> == Enable Streaming

Reviewer 2: This title indicates a task, for which I expect to see a series of steps.
What follows is fabulous writing, so I am kinda' okay with that?
But I ask you to consider whether these tasks can be recast as numbered steps, or just retitle them slightly: Streaming Enablement? Process to Enable Streaming? Methods of Enabling Streaming? Streaming Enablement Properties? Something like that. I'm sure you can do better than I can at the moment....  ;-)

> Streaming is not enabled by default. You can use two configuration properties to stream data in a supported data format:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Streaming is not enabled by default. You use one of two available configuration properties to stream data in the supported data format that you require:
```

Author: Since one isn't required, I feel the need to say "can".

> * `streaming` property for reading source data as a stream

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `streaming` property, for reading source data as a stream
```

> * `deferred` writer property for passing an output stream directly to the next message processor in a flow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `deferred` writer property, for passing an output stream directly to the next message processor in a flow
```

Reviewer 2: Per the organization suggestion at the title, could we then have one subtask for enabling in each of these ways?

> To enable streaming when reading source data, you must set the `streaming` reader property to `true` on the data source. You can enable streaming on a data source through the *MIME Type* setting `outputMimeType`. You can set the property in a Mule component that accepts source data, such as an HTTP listener or an On New or Updated File operation.

Reviewer 2: Is this a Prerequisite?
Again, if you can use the Task template (or retitle), that would help achieve dept. consistency.

Reviewer 2: Are the three sentences above in logical order?

1. Set prop to true.
2. Set `outputMimeType`.
3. Set prop (Step 1) in listener or use an operation.?

Author: Not a prerequisite. It's just a setting. Use of steps here isn't necessary.

[source,XML,linenums]
----
<flow name="dw-streaming-example" >
  <http:listener doc:name="Listener"
      outputMimeType="application/json; streaming=true"
      config-ref="HTTP_Listener_config" path="/input"/>
</flow>
----

Notice that `streaming=true` is part of the `outputMimeType` value. Other Mule components, such as the File and FTP components, also support the MIME Type setting.

> To pass the streamed output to the next message processor, you can use the `output` directive in a DataWeave script, for example:

Reviewer 2: Is this a subsequent step (Task)?

Author: Steps aren't appropriate for this section.

Author: We don't require people to stream data to the next processor. It's an independent thing they can do if they want/need to. Developers think in units of things they need/want to do, like building blocks. They want to know what they can do and have examples that show them the way its done and, in this case, how it's done differently depending on the format. But these are steps per se.

[source,XML,linenums]
----
output application/json deferred=true
----

For more detail on use of the `deferred` property, see <<stream_output>>.

[[stream_csv]]

> == Streaming CSV

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Streaming CSV Example"?

Reviewer 2: So, another org. question: This topic focuses on steaming in DataWeave. From what I have read so far and skimmed ahead to see, it looks like we have...:

1. Intro to purpose and advantages of streaming
2. Two properties to configure to enable streaming
3. Three streaming formats:
     - CSV
     - JSON
     - XML
4. Prerequisite? validation that streaming can even take place
5. Validation failures...before actually configuring streaming?
     - Error 1
     - Error 2
6. Streaming the output (method 2 from step 2...does that mean that all text in between is about method 1 from step 2?)

Do you see what I am saying; the flow/chronology kind of confuses me.

Maybe what we really have here are two topics: one about the prerequisite coding work to ensure that streaming can be successful, and one about how to enable streaming after that has been done?

Or maybe the flow for this one topic should be more overtly stated in the titles:

= Blah streaming
What it is, why audience cares, mention processing vs. output, three processing formats, and also need to validate (before?)
== Types of streaming
=== streaming (processing CSV, JSON, XML)
=== deferred (output)
== Prerequisite coding to enable streaming processing (separate topic?)
=== Avoid this potential error
=== Avoid this potential error
== Streaming processing formats
=== CSV
=== JSON
=== XML
== Streaming output (deferred)

Reviewer 2: (Sorry about the long comment...trying to work out in writing what the actual chronology is/should be....)

Author: validation isn't a prerequisite. It's an experimental feature that people can try out. We don't want to tell them they have to use it. We don't want to emphasize it. These aren't tasks. This is general guidance on how to use some properties.

> CSV is simplest format for streaming because of its structure. Each row below the CSV header is a streamable record. The following CSV example consists of records that contain `name`, `lastName`, and `age` values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CSV is simplest format for streaming because of its structure. Each row below the CSV header is a streamable record. The following CSV example consists of records that contain `name`, `lastName`, and `age` values:
```

​
[source,CSV,linenums]
----
name,lastName,age
mariano,achaval,37
leandro,shokida,30
pedro,achaval,4
christian,chibana,25
sara,achaval,2
matias,achaval,8
----
​

> To stream the CSV example, the following script selects values from each record. It uses the `map` function to iterate over each record in the document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To stream this CSV example, the following script selects values from each record. It uses the `map` function to iterate over each record in the document.
```
Do we need to add any further explanation of how selecting values = streaming, or how mapping/"iterating over" relates to this?

Reviewer 2: Okay, no more org stuff; copyedits and questions only!  :-)

​
[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
payload map (record) ->
    {
        FullName: record.lastName ++ "," ++ record.name,
        Age: record.age
    }
----

> Although streaming does not support random access to the entire document, a DataWeave script can access data randomly _within each record_ because each record is loaded into memory. For example, the expression `record.lastName ++ "," ++ record.name,` can access a `lastName` value before it accesses a `name` value even though the order of values is reversed in the input.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to offer an explanation of when or why a user would want or need random functionality?

Author: No we don't need to explain it. The answer is also implied in the next sentence. Their script can access the fields in the record in any order because the record is stored in memory, whereas the entire doc is not.

However, streaming does not work in the following script. The script requires random access to the entire document to return the elements in a different order than they are given in the input.
​
[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----

> [payload[-2], payload[-1], payload[3]]

Reviewer 2: Is it okay that #3 does not include the hyphen before the numeral (-2 and -1 but just 3)?

Reviewer 2: I lied about not mentioning org. issues any more...

One more random thought:
= Prepare to Enable Streaming (coding and validation)
= Streaming Formats (csv, json, xml)
= Enable Streaming (processing flow vs. deferred processing)

Author: Yes, it's ok [3] doesn't have the -.

Author: this is not meant to be a series of steps but extended explanation and guidance around streaming.

----
​
[[stream_json]]
== Streaming JSON
​

> The unit of a JSON stream is each element in an array.

Reviewer 2: Anything to add for context/relationship with other two formats?

Author: nope

> Note that DataWeave added limited support for JSON streaming in version 2.2.0 for Mule 4.2. To stream JSON in that version, DataWeave required the root to be an array. In Mule 4.3, DataWeave extended support for streaming to arrays that are not at the root of the input.

Reviewer 2: Consider rewording to focus on evolution Mule 4.2 to 4.3: 

```suggestion
Note that DataWeave 2.2.0 support for JSON streaming for Mule 4.2 was limited by the requirement that the root be an array. DataWeave support in Mule 4.3 includes streaming to arrays that are not at the root of the input.
```

Reviewer 2: Provide a brief text intro. to the example? It does not logically follow the previous note.
Or maybe move it to follow the intro, and then follow the example with the note.

[[example_json]]
[source,JSON,linenums]
----
{
    "name" : "Mariano",
    "lastName": "Achaval",
    "family": [
        {"name": "Sara", "age": 2},
        {"name": "Pedro", "age": 4},
        {"name": "Matias", "age": 8}
    ],
    "age": 37
}
----
​

> DataWeave can stream `payload.family` and perform random access within each element of that array. However, DataWeave cannot randomly access the container object. For example, it is not possible to stream `{ a: payload.age , b: payload.family}` because `age` follows `family`, and DataWeave cannot go backwards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, DataWeave can stream `payload.family` and perform random access within each element of that array. However, DataWeave cannot randomly access the container object. For example, it is not possible to stream `{ a: payload.age , b: payload.family}` because `age` follows `family`, and DataWeave cannot go backwards.
```

​
[[stream_xml]]
== XML
​

> XML is more complicated than JSON because there are no arrays in the document.

Reviewer 2: Another Stoopid Kim question: will all audiences understand why having no arrays makes this more complicated?

Author: If they don't, they should read the section on JSON. One thing we want is for users to understand (and that we're emphasizing) is that the configs for streaming and the way you access data when streaming are different for the different formats.

To enable XML streaming, DataWeave provides the following reader property to define the location in the document to stream:

*  `collectionPath`
​

> For example, assume the following XML input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, assume the following XML input:
```
You might make it a practice to go back over your topics that have syntax in them and make sure that...:
1. The sentence or fragment directly preceding the visual is a logical transition to it.
2. That sentence or fragment ends with a colon.

​
[[example_xml]]
[source,XML,linenums]
----
<order>
    <header>
        <date>Wed Nov 15 13:45:28 EST 2006</date>
        <customer number="123123">Joe</customer>
    </header>
    <order-items>
        <order-item id="31">
            <product>111</product>
            <quantity>2</quantity>
            <price>8.90</price>
        </order-item>
        <order-item id="31">
            <product>222</product>
            <quantity>7</quantity>
            <price>5.20</price>
        </order-item>
        <order-item id="31">
            <product>111</product>
            <quantity>2</quantity>
            <price>8.90</price>
        </order-item>
        <order-item id="31">
            <product>222</product>
            <quantity>7</quantity>
            <price>5.20</price>
        </order-item>
        <order-item id="31">
            <product>222</product>
            <quantity>7</quantity>
            <price>5.20</price>
        </order-item>
    </order-items>
</order>
----
​

> Given this XML source data, you can set unit of the stream as `<order-item/>` by setting `collectionPath='order.order-items'` in the `outputMimeType` value, for example:

Reviewer 2: "the"?
```suggestion
Given this XML source data, you can set the unit of the stream to `<order-item/>` by setting `collectionPath='order.order-items'` in the `outputMimeType` value:
```

<flow name="dw-streaming-example" >
  <http:listener doc:name="Listener"
      outputMimeType="application/xml; collectionpath='order.order-items'; streaming=true"
      config-ref="HTTP_Listener_config" path="/input"/>
</flow>

> The following DataWeave script is able to stream the XML input using each `<order-items/>` element as the streamable unit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following DataWeave script streams the XML input using each `<order-items/>` element as the streamable unit.
```

[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
output application/xml
---
{
  salesorder: {
    itemList: payload.order."order-items".*"order-item" map {
      ("i_" ++ $$) : {
        id: $.@id,
        productId: $.product,
        quantity: $.quantity,
        price: $.price
      }
    }
  }
}
----

> The script produces the following XML output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The script produces the following XML output:
```

[source,XML,linenums]
----
<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<salesorder>
  <itemList>
    <i_0>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>2</quantity>
      <productId>111</productId>
      <price>8.90</price>
    </i_0>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_1>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>7</quantity>
      <productId>222</productId>
      <price>5.20</price>
    </i_1>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_2>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>2</quantity>
      <productId>111</productId>
      <price>8.90</price>
    </i_2>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_3>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>7</quantity>
      <productId>222</productId>
      <price>5.20</price>
    </i_3>
  </itemList>
  <itemList>
    <i_4>
      <id>31</id>
      <quantity>7</quantity>
      <productId>222</productId>
      <price>5.20</price>
    </i_4>
  </itemList>
</salesorder>
----
​

> == Validate that a Script is Streamable (Experimental Feature)

Reviewer 2: See previous comments re. org. but also about wording: is this topic about _validating_ after coding, or _coding_ to produce a result that can be streamed (prereq)?

​

> To help you code in a streamable way and avoid mistakes that can break the streaming process, DataWeave provides an _advanced, experimental_ annotation and a related directive:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To help you code so that streaming is successful, DataWeave provides the following _advanced, experimental_ annotation and a related directive:
```

> * `@StreamCapable()` +
> annotation: Use this annotation to validate whether the script can sequentially access a variable (typically the `payload` variable).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `@StreamCapable()` +
Use this annotation to validate whether the script can sequentially access a variable (typically the `payload` variable).
```

* `input` directive: +
The `@StreamCapable()` annotation requires the use of an input directive in the DataWeave script that identifies the MIME type of the data source, for example, `input payload application/xml`.

> The validator checks a script against the following criteria:

Reviewer 2: What validator? Do we need to mention it in the intro sentence to this topic?

Author: The validator that is triggered by the @StreamCapable annotation ...

> * The variable is referenced only once

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The variable is referenced only once.
```

Reviewer 2: Which variable? Not mentioned earlier in this subtopic.

> * No index selector is set for negative access, such as `[-1]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* No index selector is set for negative access, such as `[-1]`.
```

> * No reference to the variable is found in a nested lambda

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* No reference to the variable is found in a nested lambda.
```

Reviewer 2: "lambda function"?

> If all are true, the selected data is streamable. The following example validates successfully. The script is designed to act on the <<example_json, JSON input>> from the <<stream_json, JSON streaming>> section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If all criteria are met, the selected data is streamable. +
The following example validates successfully. The script is designed to act on the <<example_json, JSON input>> from the <<stream_json, JSON streaming>> section:
```

[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

@StreamCapable()
input payload application/json streaming=true
output application/json
---
payload.family filter (member) -> member.age > 3
----

The script successfully validates and returns the following output:

[source,JSON,linenums]
----
[
  {
    "name": "Pedro",
    "age": 4
  },
  {
    "name": "Matias",
    "age": 8
  }
]
----

> === Validation Failures
> 
> If any of the criteria that the valiator checks are false, the validation fails. 

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that this qualifies as a separate topic, with a separate title, because this intro sentence is a logical followup to "If all criteria are met" in the previous topic....
```suggestion
=== Validation Failures

If any of the criteria that the validator checks is false, the validation fails. 
```
"any (one) of is"

> Before proceeding, note that validation can fail in some cases when streaming works. If you write a script in a way that sequentially accesses the input variable in a given data source, streaming works, but that script might not work in all cases. For example, JSON does not place a restriction on the order of the keys in an object. If the keys in some JSON documents arrive in a different order than the script expects, streaming will fail in those cases. The annotation processor follows the rules of the format and cannot assume that the keys always arrive in the same order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, note that in some cases a validation can fail when streaming succeeds. If you write a script in a way that sequentially accesses the input variable in a given data source, streaming succeeds but that script might not. For example, JSON does not place a restriction on the order of the keys in an object. If the keys in some JSON documents arrive in a different order than the script expects, streaming fails. The annotation processor follows the rules of the format and cannot assume that the keys always arrive in the same order.
```

> ==== Error: Variable is Referenced More Than Once

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Error: Variable Is Referenced More Than Once
```
verbs are always init. capped in titles: it's not just length, but also part of speech that determines title-style caps

> Validation fails if a script attempts to reference the same variable more than once.

Reviewer 2: Did we not cover this earlier? 
This is clearly stated as a criteria for success; do we really need troubleshooting topics to address users not following the documentation properly?

Author: people need to understand what error they will see. This is the intro for that.

> The following script is designed to act on the <<example_json, JSON input>> from the <<stream_json, JSON streaming>> section. Validation fails because the script attempts to reference the `payload` variable more than once.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following script is designed to act on the <<example_json, JSON input>> from the <<stream_json, JSON streaming>> section. Validation fails because the script attempts to reference the `payload` variable more than once:
```

[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

@StreamCapable()
input payload application/json
output application/json
---
 {
     family: payload.family filter (member) -> member.age > 3,
     name: payload.name
 }
----

The script fails with the following error:

[source,error,linenums]
----
4| input payload application/json streaming=true
         ^^^^^^^
Parameter `payload` is not stream capable.
Reasons:
 - Variable payload is referenced more than once. Locations:
---------------------------

8|      family: payload.family filter (member) -> member.age > 3,
                ^^^^^^^
---------------------------

9|      name: payload.name
              ^^^^^^^ at
4| input payload application/json streaming=true
----

==== Error: Wrong Scope Reference

> 

Reviewer 2: ditto: why document the user's failure to heed prerequisites, notices, and other clearly documented requirements?

Author: We're showing the error that is produced when you use the annotation but fail to meet the requirements of the annotation processor.  If they get that error, they'll understand why.

Validation fails if a script attempts to reference a variable from a scope that is different from the scope in which the variable is defined.

The following script fails because the `payload` variable is referenced from within the lambda expression `[1,2,3] map ((item, index) -> payload)`. Even if the expression is `[1] map ((item, index) -> payload`, streaming fails because `payload` is in the wrong scope.

[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

@StreamCapable()
input payload application/json
output application/json
---
[1,2,3] map ((item, index) -> payload)
---

The example fails with the following error:

[source,error,linenums]
----
4| input payload application/json
         ^^^^^^^
Parameter `payload` is not stream capable.
Reasons:
 - Variable payload is referenced in a different scope from where it was defined. Locations:
---------------------------

9| [1,2,3] map ((item, index) -> payload)
                ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ at
4| input payload application/json
----

[[stream_output]]

> == Streaming Output

Reviewer 2: Please prepare the audience to see this topic last in the set.
I thought it was a peer/option to the `streaming` parameter and expected to see it earlier.

> After processing streamed data, you can stream the output directly to another message processor. To facilitate this behavior, use the `deferred` writer property in the output directive of the DataWeave script, for example, `output application/json deferred=true`.

Reviewer 2: So, "after processing streamed data" refers to ALL of the preceding narrative?

Reviewer 2: "you can...": do we need to explain why or under what circumstances our audience wants or needs to do this?

Author: We were talking about streaming input before. That was explained when we talked about setting streaming=true on the data source. We showed how to make the DataWeave script act on that streamed input, and we talked about the access limitations.  Now we're talking about how to stream the output to the next component in the flow.

Author: When we talked about end-to-end streaming in the beginning of the doc, we said that it processed the data more quickly without the memory requirements. We explained that the deferred mode avoids saving the output to disk before passing it to the next component.

> Building on the example in <<stream_json, JSON streaming>>, the following flow uses a DataWeave script to filter streamed input and then streams the output directly to a Write operation.

Reviewer 2: Clarify that this is a title:
```suggestion
Building on the example in <<stream_json, JSON Streaming>>, the following flow uses a DataWeave script to filter streamed input and then streams the output directly to a Write operation:
```

[source,DataWeave,linenums]
----
<flow name="dw-streamingexample">
  <file:listener doc:name="On New or Updated File"
    config-ref="File_Config" directory="/Users/me/testing/json" recursive="false" outputMimeType="application/json;
    streaming=true">
    <scheduling-strategy>
      <fixed-frequency timeUnit="SECONDS" />
    </scheduling-strategy>
    <file:matcher />
  </file:listener>
  <ee:transform doc:name="Transform Message">
    <ee:message>
      <ee:set-payload><![CDATA[%dw 2.0

@StreamCapable()
input payload application/json
output application/json deferred = true
---
{
   family: payload.family filter (member) -> member.age > 1
}]]></ee:set-payload>
    </ee:message>
  </ee:transform>
  <file:write doc:name="Write"
      config-ref="File_Config2"
      path="/Users/me/testing/output.json"/>
</flow>
----

> 

Reviewer 2: Provide a transitional sentence or frag. between the example and this ordered list?

Author: done
